JavaScript Fundamentals 5: Give better example of reduce, map and filter methods. (#27344)
TheOdinProject/curriculum: foundations/javascript_basics/fundamentals-5.md

1. This javascript.info [article on objects](https://javascript.info/object) is the best place to get started.
2. [The MDN tutorial](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/JavaScript/Objects/Basics) isn't bad either, so check it out if you need another take on the subject.

### Intermediate/advanced array magic

Besides being a quick and handy way to store data, arrays also have a set of functions for manipulating that data in very powerful ways.  Once you begin to master these functions you will start to see ways to use them all over the place! There are really only a handful of these functions... but as you'll soon see, the possibilities of what you can do with them are near endless.

As an example of what we mean, let's consider a `sumOfTripledEvens` function. It will:

- Take in an array
- For every even number, it will triple it
- Then it will sum all those even numbers

Can you try thinking of how you could implement a function like that using pseudocode?
  
1. We need to perform an operation only on the even numbers.

> 1. We need to transform *those* numbers into triple numbers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We need to transform *those* numbers by multiplying them by 3.
```
More explicit. "Triple numbers" is somewhat vague

#### Summary 

You've learnt about the three powerful array methods which are `map`, `filter` and `reduce`. They allow us to write shorter code that is more readable and less prone to bugs. 

For a quick recap of these array methods, consider this picture which should visually explain them in terms of sandwiches:

![example of filter, map and reduce methods being used to visually represent making a sandwich](https://static.observableusercontent.com/thumbnail/bea194824f0d5842addcb7910bb488795c6f80f143ab5332b28a317ebcecd603.jpg)

Let's do some quick practice before your assignment! Rewrite the `sumOfTripledEvens(array)` function using these three methods.

Once you are finished and you've tested that your function works correctly, check out the solution below.
<details><summary>Solution</summary>

```javascript
function sumOfTripledEvens(array) {
  return array
    .filter(num => num % 2 === 0)
    .map(num => num * 3)
    .reduce((acc, curr) => acc + curr);
}
```

> </details>

Reviewer: I don't think the backticks inside the details block is going to work, at least according to the [lesson preview tool](https://www.theodinproject.com/lessons/preview). My suggestion of using the code elements might though. @thatblindgeye do you have any suggestions regarding this?

Reviewer 2: You need to give the `details` element the attribute `markdown="block"`
```md
<details markdown="block">
</details>
```
Then it will render the markdown properly.

Author: I've added 

> You need to give the `details` element the attribute `markdown="block"`
> 
> ```
> <details markdown="block">
> </details>
> ```
> 
> Then it will render the markdown properly.

Added it, awesome. It works correctly now.

- It also takes in an `initialValue` as a second argument (after the callback), which helps when we don't want our initial value to be the first element in the array. For instance, if we wanted to sum all numbers in an array, we could call reduce without an `initialValue`, but if we wanted to sum all numbers in an array and add 10, we could use 10 as our `initialValue`.

```js
arr.reduce(((total, currentItem) => total * currentItem), 1); // Outputs [1, 2, 6, 24, 120];
```

In the above function, we: 
- Pass in a callback function, which is `(total, currentItem) => total * currentItem`.
- Initialize total to `1` in the second argument.

So what `.reduce()` will do, is it will once again go through every element in `arr` and apply the `callback` function to it. It then changes `total`, without actually changing the array itself. After it's done, it returns `total`.

#### Summary 

You've learnt about the three powerful array methods which are `map`, `filter` and `reduce`. They allow us to write shorter code that is more readable and less prone to bugs. 

For a quick recap of these array methods, consider this picture which should visually explain them in terms of sandwiches:

> ![Alt text](https://static.observableusercontent.com/thumbnail/bea194824f0d5842addcb7910bb488795c6f80f143ab5332b28a317ebcecd603.jpg)

Author: How about: 'example of filter, map and reduce methods being used to visually represent making a sandwich'. 

Let me know what you think about this. I think the image is worth including because it is a nice visual representation of what we've been talking about in the lesson and people will find it helpful.

> ![Alt text](https://static.observableusercontent.com/thumbnail/bea194824f0d5842addcb7910bb488795c6f80f143ab5332b28a317ebcecd603.jpg)

Reviewer 3: That sounds great to me!

Besides being a quick and handy way to store data, arrays also have a set of functions for manipulating that data in very powerful ways.  Once you begin to master these functions you will start to see ways to use them all over the place! There are really only a handful of these functions... but as you'll soon see, the possibilities of what you can do with them are near endless.

As an example of what we mean, let's consider a `sumOfTripledEvens` function. It will:
- Take in an array
- For every even number, it will triple it
- Then it will sum all those even numbers

Currently, if you wanted to implement a function like that you may write something similar to this:

```javascript
function sumOfTripledEvens(array) {
  let sum = 0;
  for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    if (array[i] % 2 === 0) {
      sum += array[i] * 3;
    }
  }
  return sum;
}
```

> We have a function `sumOfTripledEvens` that takes in an `array`, it then iterates through the array and for every even number it adds triple that number to sum. After the `for` loop is complete, it returns the sum.

Reviewer: Just for increased clarity, let's add a note that this function introduces three problems that need to be solved. Can you think of what they are? (Possibly a spoiler tag)

1. We need to perform an operation on *only the even numbers*
1. We need to transform those numbers into triple their value
1. We need to add the results up

This can help to clarify why we might need to call three different methods to get our result.

Additionally, this can give us a chance to explain filter, map, and reduce. Filter: I need an array with some of these items, but possibly not all of them. Map: I need an array with all of these items, but the values need to be transformed in some way. Reduce: I need some data (any type) that can only be calculated with all of the values in this array.

Author: I've completely overhauled the section, now it goes in-depth about each method specifically and also gives a brief introduction on callbacks. What do you think about it?

  
1. We need to perform an operation only on the even numbers.
1. We need to transform *those* numbers into triple numbers.
1. Finally, we need to add the result up from the previous transformation.

So using that logic, you may end up implementing something like this:

```javascript
function sumOfTripledEvens(array) {
  let sum = 0;
  for (let i = 0; i < array.length; i++) {
    // Step 1: If the element is an even number
    if (array[i] % 2 === 0) {
      // Step 2: Multiply this number by three
      const tripleEvenNumber = array[i] * 3;

      // Step 3: Add the new number to the total
      sum += tripleEvenNumber;
    }
  }
  return sum;
}
```

In the above code, there are 3 important snippets to consider:

- `if (array[i] % 2 === 0)`: checks if a given number is even.
- `array[i] * 3;`: multiply this number by three.
- `sum += tripleEvenNumber`: add that number to the total.

Every single piece solves a cruicial problem with our code.
But it is possible to make the function more concise and readable by using some built-in array methods. 
These methods are slightly more complicated than you've been used to, so let's take a moment to understand how to use them.

> #### The .map() method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The map method
```

> `.map(callback)` is one such function. It expects a `callback` as an argument, which is a fancy way to say "I want to pass another function as an argument to my function".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`map` is one such function. It expects a `callback` as an argument, which is a fancy way to say "I want you to pass another function as an argument to my function".
```

> Let's say we had a function `addOne(num)`, which takes in `num` as an argument and outputs that `num` increased by 1. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's say we had a function `addOne`, which takes in `num` as an argument and outputs that `num` increased by 1. 
```

> And let's say we had an array of numbers, `const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]` and we'd like to increase all of these numbers by `+1` using our `addOne(num)` function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And let's say we had an array of numbers, `const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]` and we'd like to increment all of these numbers by 1 using our `addOne` function.
```

> Instead of making a `for` loop and iterating over the above array, we could use our `.map(callback)` array method instead, which **automatically** iterates over an array for us. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of making a `for` loop and iterating over the above array, we could use our `map` array method instead, which **automatically** iterates over an array for us. 
```

We don't need to do any extra work aside from simply passing the function we want to use in:
```js
function addOne(num) {

>   return ++num;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  return num + 1;
```
Keep it simple and don't mutate

}
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
arr.map(addOne); // Outputs [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]
```

This is a much more elegant approach, what do you think? We could even go a step further and define a function right inside of `map()` like so:

```js
const arr = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5];
arr.map(num => num + 1); // Outputs [2, 3, 4, 5, 6]; 
```

> Can you try think of a way to multiply every number in the array by 3 instead of adding 1 to it?  
> We could do it like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, instead of passing a function that adds 1, let's pass a function that multiplies by 3:
```

```js
arr.map(num => num * 3); // Outputs [6, 9, 12, 15, 18];
```

> #### The .filter() method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The filter method
```

`.filter(callback)` is very similar to `.map(callback)`, it still iterates through the array and applies the callback function on every item. However, now instead of simply transforming values, it evaluates them. 
Let's say we had a function, `isOdd` that returns either `true` if a number is odd or `false` if it isn't. 

> The `.filter(callback)` expects the `callback` to return either `true` or `false`. If it returns `true`, the value is included in the output. Otherwise, it isn't.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `filter` method expects the `callback` to return either `true` or `false`. If it returns `true`, the value is included in the output. Otherwise, it isn't.
```

Consider the array from our previous example, `[1, 2, 3, 4, 5]`. 
If we wanted to remove all even numbers from this array, we could use `.filter()` like this:

```js
arr.filter(isOdd); // Outputs [1, 3, 5];
```

> - `.filter(isOdd)` will iterate through the `arr` and pass **every value** into the `isOdd()` callback. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `filter` will iterate through `arr` and pass **every value** into the `isOdd` callback function, one at a time. 
```

> - `.isOdd()` will return `true` when the value is odd, which means this value is included in the output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `isOdd` will return `true` when the value is odd, which means this value is included in the output.
```

> - If it's an even number, `isOdd()` will return `false` and not include it in the final output.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If it's an even number, `isOdd` will return `false` and not include it in the final output.
```

> #### The .reduce() method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The reduce method
```

Finally, let's say that we wanted to multiply all of the numbers in our `arr` together like this: `1 * 2 * 3 * 4 * 5`.

> First, we'd have to declare a variable `total` and initialize it to 0. Then, we'd iterate through the array with a `for` loop and multiply the `total` by the current number.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, we'd have to declare a variable `total` and initialize it to 1. Then, we'd iterate through the array with a `for` loop and multiply the `total` by the current number.
```
If you initialized to 0, the result would always be 0 😄

> But we don't actually need to do all of that, we have our `.reduce(callback, initialValue)` method that will do the job for us. Just like `.map()` and `.reduce()` it expects a callback function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
But we don't actually need to do all of that, we have our `reduce` method that will do the job for us. Just like `.map()` and `.reduce()` it expects a callback function.
```

> However, it also takes in an `initialValue` which makes our lives easier and we don't have to declare a variable like `const total = 1` and instead `.reduce()` does that for us.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, there are two key differences with this array method:
- The callback function takes two arguments instead of one. The first argument is the `accumulator`, which is the current value of the result *at that point in the loop*. The first time through, this. value will either be set to the `initialValue` (described in the next bullet), or the first element in the array if no `initialValue` is provided. The second argument for the callback is the `current` value, which is the item currently being iterated on.
- It also takes in an `initialValue` as a second argument (after the callback), which helps when we don't want our initial value to be the first element in the array. For instance, if we wanted to sum all numbers in an array, we could call reduce without an `initialValue`, but if we wanted to sum all numbers in an array and add 10, we could use 10 as our `initialValue`.
```

```js
arr.reduce(((total, currentItem) => total * currentItem), 1); // Outputs [1, 2, 6, 24, 120];
```

In the above function, we: 
- Pass in a callback function, which is `(total, currentItem) => total * currentItem`.

> - Initialise total to `1` in the second argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Initialize total to `1` in the second argument.
```

> So what `.reduce()` will do, is it will once again go through every element in `arr` and apply the `callback` function to it. It then **stores** the output in `total`, which is 1 at the beginning. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So `reduce` will, like the other methods, go through every element in `arr` and apply the `callback` function to it. It then **stores** the output in `total`, which in the previous example was 1. 
```

#### Summary 

> You've learnt about the three powerful array methods which are `.map()`, `.filter()` and `.reduce()`. They allow us to write shorter code that is more readable and less prone to bugs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You've learnt about the three powerful array methods which are `map`, `filter` and `reduce`. They allow us to write shorter code that is more readable and less prone to bugs. 
```

For a quick recap of these array methods, consider this picture which should visually explain them in terms of sandwiches:

![Alt text](https://static.observableusercontent.com/thumbnail/bea194824f0d5842addcb7910bb488795c6f80f143ab5332b28a317ebcecd603.jpg)

> Your task is now to rewrite the `sumOfTripledEvens(array)` function using these three methods. **Hint**: you don't need to declare any variables, just having a single `return` within the function will be enough.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's do some quick practice before your assignment! Rewrite the `sumOfTripledEvens(array)` function using these three methods.
```
I don't think that hint is particularly helpful, they will see once they click the result.

> Once you are finished and you've tested that your function works correctly, check out the [solution in this gist](#).

Reviewer: Once you are finished and you've tested that your function works correctly, check out the solution below:
<details>
  <summary>Solution</summary>
  <pre><code lang="js">
  function sumOfTripledEvens(array) {
    return array
      .filter(num => num % 2 === 0)
      .map(num => num * 3)
      .reduce((acc, curr) => acc + curr);
  }
  </code></pre>
</details>

Reviewer: The above is another suggestion, but we'll need to make sure the formatting is correct
